[THEME MUSIC]
>>Kundalini is spiritual energy,
the energy of consciousness,
which is thought to
reside at the base
of the spine of
every human body.
And when aroused, it brings
new states of consciousness,
including mystical
illumination, exalted
powers, ecstasy, bliss,
clairvoyance, healing,
and transcendence of self.
Why is information
about Kundalini
not spread to the
mainstream yet?
What is needed to recognize
this power within you?
This secret has been kept
hidden for centuries.
However, Kundalini is
within every human,
a resource of energy
that went fully awakened
allows us to reach our full
potential with joy, peace,
and unconditional love.
>>REGINA MEREDITH:
If there was ever
a doubt that the position of
the planets in our solar system
have an effect on how
our lives play out,
there won't be after
this interview.
Barbara Hand Clow
has invested decades
in investigating the delicate
matrix of cosmic effects
on our subtle bodies,
and how they affect us
during critical
times of our lives,
particularly midlife crises.
If we accept that there
is a template from birth,
then we can go through these
challenging periods of life
with grace and ease.
She's with us today to discuss
her new book "Astrology
and the Rising of Kundalini."
Welcome back.
Just--
>>BARBARA HAND CLOW: Hi, Regina.
>>REGINA: --you are so
popular among our viewers.
I've going to tell you,
the last two interviews
we did on "The Alchemy of
Nine Dimensions" lives on.
>>CLOW: Well good.
I'm happy to be here.
>>REGINA: And this book,
it's a rewrite of one
that you wrote back in 1991.
Let's talk about a) why
you wrote the first one.
What prompted it?
And then b) why you felt
a need to rewrite it,
because I know there was a lot
of intervening of validation
through the years.
>>CLOW: Well, I was an
astrologer back in the 1970s
and 1980s and seeing clients--
normal astrologer things.
And I just kept noticing
that certain transits had
such a huge influence
on people's lives,
particularly Saturn transits,
and Uranus opposite Uranus,
which occurs at midlife crisis.
And then also I've written
another book about Chiron.
So I was watching for transits
of Chiron pretty carefully.
And so when I came
to the late 1980s,
I realized that
something else was
going on with these
transits, particularly
Uranus opposite Uranus.
And during that period of time
when I was reading charts,
I also was watching
out for Kundalini
rising, because for those of
us working in healing arts,
we pay very close
attention to what's
going on with
Kundalini energy, which
is the fire energy
in our bodies.
Because that's what heals
us and that's what helps us
transform our consciousness.
So I started noticing that
at midlife crisis, somewhere
between 38 and 44,
all of my clients
were showing signs
of Kundalini rising.
And yet, in the typical
Eastern tradition,
this only occurs if you do
certain kinds of breathing
exercises and meditations
and things like that.
So I decided that
midlife crisis was
being triggered by
Kundalini rising.
And then I started watching
for the exact points
of Uranus opposite Uranus,
which occur three times.
And people were having
massive Kundalini risings
at the very first point
of Uranus opposite Uranus.
Spiritual emergency.
>>REGINA: OK.
Well, most people
would say, yeah,
I certainly had an
emotional emergency.
Everyone can relate to that.
But because of how
we've been conditioned
when it comes to Kundalini, we
think oh, my god, this blowout
experience.
It travels up the spine.
I'm enlightened.
I see everything.
I can travel out of my body.
What do you mean when you're
talking about these Kundalini
experiences?
>>CLOW: I'm actually talking
about the same thing.
But what happens within our
chakra systems, the lower
chakras, root chakras, sacral
chakra, and the solar plexus
chakra, and then
up into the heart
is when we reach
that point where
that larger level of Ku--
Kundalini's always rising
or we wouldn't be alive.
But when it comes to
that massive rising,
it's going to go into whatever
chakra is kind of stuck
and filled with contents
that need to be cleared.
And usually at midlife
crisis it goes right
into the solar
plexus, which forces
you to deal with
anger and conflict.
And so midlife crisis is
often a relational crisis
because we start having
difficulty with our partners
at that point in time.
>>REGINA: The 30s
are a hard decade.
I found that was
a difficult-- It
was a wonderful
decade in that that's
when I had my
beautiful son, which
was the most wonderful thing
I did in this lifetime.
But at the same
time, I just found
it a very challenging
decade in terms
of navigating to find
out who and what you are.
And as I talk to people, it
seems the 30s, for many people,
is difficult.
>>CLOW: Yeah, that's
absolutely true.
So the first transit that
the book is working with
is Saturn return, which
occurs for all of us
when we're 29 to 30 years old.
And at that point,
we make a change
in our physical matrix, which
would be jobs or marriages
or having a child or whatever.
And if you watch people
closely, everybody
makes a major change
at age 29 to 30.
You just can't find
anybody who doesn't.
But as soon as they
make that major change
and shift their reality at
that physical plane level,
then they start processing
themselves emotionally.
And at this point
in time for humans,
the most difficult part
of our learning process
is definitely emotional.
So all the way through
the 30s, actually
were having a rocky
emotional journey,
because when we come up
to midlife crisis, then
we're going to have
an emotional crisis.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
OK, now let's go back
for just a moment.
You wrote a lot of this
back in the original book,
and what happened?
What happened by way of
your own understanding that
created the need to
rewrite and expand?
>>CLOW: Well, Regina,
actually the book
went through three
revisions, but this
is a major rewrite at
this point in time,
because when I floated this
idea back in the early '90s,
it was a hypothesis that
I wanted other astrologers
to test, and I
wanted readers to see
if this fit with
their experience.
So after 25 years approximately,
it's not a hypothesis.
It's a theory now.
And I think it's an
extremely accurate theory
and a very important one.
Because you can anticipate
these changes in your life,
first of all.
And then secondly, you can
understand the process that's
involved, because if you
didn't understand what
the process was, you wouldn't
be able to really take
advantage of it or
use it very easily.
And so once you
start to understand
that energy is
actually pushing--
I call it the solar
growth theory.
The idea that we, as
humans, are plants,
and that we are growing
through these stages
of life being fed by
the energy from the Sun.
I actually think that this
is a biological process.
So at this point, it's really
a strong theory and not
just an idea, not
just a hypothesis.
>>REGINA: You have
a lovely forward
in the book by Dr.
Richard Gerber.
>>CLOW: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And I
lifted a little bit
of what he said,
because I thought
it was so eloquently put
it in such a compact space,
that I thought it worth
reading at this time,
so people can understand this
is not a science of belief,
so to speak.
He's saying, "When
the planets reach
the particular geometric
position relative to Earth that
is the same as the
birth time, there
is a reactivation of the
same magnetic pattern
in the resonating chakra,
causing a cascading energy
transfer from an astral, to the
etheric, down to the physical."
Now, that's a lot
in one sentence.
>>CLOW: Yeah.
That whole introduction
is amazing.
And when he first--
Richard Gerber, of course,
is the author of
"Vibrational Medicine."
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>CLOW: He's definitely one
of the most important people
in the field of understanding
complementary medicine.
And Richard's not
with us anymore.
He died five or six years
ago at a very young age,
unfortunately.
And the introduction
is worth the price
of the book, what he--
>>REGINA: It was so well done.
>>CLOW: His proof of astrology
is just absolutely stunning.
So thank you for bringing
that up because in the past,
nobody could even read it.
I had to read it about
10 times before I
could understand
the introduction.
But what's interesting
is at this point,
you can understand it
now when you read it.
It's a real--
>>REGINA: Sitting there.
>>CLOW: It's a real story
of how far we've come.
>>REGINA: It really is.
Because just the use of the term
"subtle bodies" 30 years ago
was not well understood at all.
>>CLOW: That's right.
>>REGINA: And so
then as he says--
I love this-- "cascading from
the astral, to the etheric,
to the physical.
>>CLOW: Isn't that great.
>>REGINA: So can you
expand on that for us
about how that matrix works?
>>CLOW: Now, this gets
into multi-dimensional
consciousness.
>>REGINA: Yes, but that's
why we're doing this.
>>CLOW: That's right.
We're here for that.
And the issue, as
I understand it,
would be that when we're ready
at a certain point, which
has to do with the astrological
transits, then what can happen
is this breakthrough from
higher realms of consciousness
and higher dimensions
of consciousness
can come into our
field and can influence
us to go to very high
levels of consciousness.
And so, when you think about
it from this perspective
and what Dr. Gerber
had to say about it,
it's not just Kundalini rising.
It's also an opening
to higher dimensions.
Now, of course, in ancient
spiritual traditions,
they've always
thought of Kundalini
rising as an open to
spiritual consciousness.
So it's a process of energy
just going in two directions
from within us.
>>REGINA: Well, he's
talking about it
originating in the astral plane.
But would you say that
it's actually starting it
with an even finer
higher dimensional--
>>CLOW: I would.
>>REGINA: --aspects of ourself.
Kind of then processing
through the astral?
>>CLOW: Yeah, I would.
And everything has to
process through the astral.
That's the thing
about being human.
Because for me in my
system, the astral plane
is basically a fourth
dimensional plane of existence.
And then we're in solid
in the third dimension
in space and time.
And so what's actually
being played with here
would be the idea that
in any given realm
there are different
kinds of timelines,
and we'll go beyond
that because-- I'll
let that one go because
it's so complicated.
But we're dealing with the
actual timelines of the planet
Saturn, which causes
formation and structure.
And then we're dealing with
the timelines of Uranus,
which triggers transformation.
And so what happens at that
midlife crisis point is
those timelines on
Uranus, in relationship
to our consciousness
here, all come together
and come into a confluence
at that point in time.
And this fall, now that it's a
theory instead of a hypothesis,
we went out and
taught three classes
that were based on
these principles.
What we did is we set up a
question and answer thing
on Saturn return, Uranus
opposite Uranus, and then
Chiron return.
And then I explained
to the students
the positive and
negative aspects
of any given decision
that you will
make at that point in time.
And the audience was just--
I've never really seen
so much excitement, because it's
really being proven by people.
If they go back and look at
what happened at midlife crisis,
they will see the
positive and negative--
>>REGINA: Well,
you had thousands
of validations on your theory.
>>CLOW: Yeah.
Yeah.
>>REGINA: Yes.
I mean on your hypothesis.
>>CLOW: Yeah.
But the reason it's
so important is now
people can start to
think, well, what's
positive and negative here,
number one, at the time.
But even more
importantly, people
seem to be able to clear
away negative residue
once they understand
what happened.
So like if a person had
a really nasty divorce
at midlife crisis, like one of
these tragic situations where
they just can't hold
the marriage together
and they bust it all up,
and then three years later
wish they hadn't done it.
Things like that,
because these are very--
>>REGINA: Yes.
And it does happen.
>>CLOW: --difficult things.
We advise, as astrologers, we
advise people to hang together
as best they can through midlife
crisis if they've been married
for quite a while,
because they may
be letting go of something
that's really valuable to them.
>>REGINA: Well and also,
it has to do with-- we'll
digress by saying
this-- but it has
to do with the age
groups each one are in.
>>CLOW: Yes.
>>REGINA: If they're both
in a similar age group
going through a similar
dynamic together,
it can be more challenging,
or maybe even easier
by way of cutting
each other slack,
than if you're 10 or 15
years apart, for example.
But I want to ask
one more question
before we get off
this multi-dimension.
We're not getting off it, but--
The notion of spirit or soul,
and the fine, fine dimension
in which it resides
has to have made choices
and decisions on behalf
of what was to be your
incarnation, to choose
these various influences to
be born under, I would assume.
>>CLOW: Um-hmm.
I think that's true, yeah.
Yeah, I do think so.
I mean I really believe
Dr. Wayne Newton's "Journey
of Souls" is right on about
the inner life and the process
that we go through to
select an incarnation.
I think that's true.
I think we select our
astrological chart.
>>REGINA: Yes, that's
what I'm getting to.
>>CLOW: Because our astrological
chart, that moment in time,
and watch-- it's
really interesting
to watch when babies come in.
Like my granddaughter was born
at dawn on December 21, 2012,
at the exact end of
the Mayan calendar.
It's incredible, you know.
>>REGINA: No accident there.
>>CLOW: Yeah, I know.
It's really amazing.
And so we do choose to come
in at a certain point in time
in order to face challenges
that our soul has
chosen to have as--
>>REGINA: And also
opportunities.
>>CLOW: Oh, absolutely
And so where astrology is
useful is-- First of all,
the best thing
about astrology is
it'll tell you when something's
going to be finished.
Because people go to
astrologers because everything's
a mess, frequently.
But also, you can
actually use astrology
in order to anticipate
a particular phase,
and then try to work
on how to use it
in the best possible way.
>>REGINA: OK, now
this is not part
of what you're
writing about here.
But do you feel that
astrocartography
has the same kind of
value where you're
picking a location
on the planet?
Longitudinally and latitudinally
you're choosing this location,
and you're choosing this time.
>>CLOW: I know it does--
>>REGINA: And so--
>>CLOW: It definitely does.
Because it's all
space time, and it's
all related to place and time.
And so you have
a certain dynamic
in your astrological chart,
and it can work better
in one place than another place.
Astrocartography really works.
I don't do it, but
it really works.
>>REGINA: It does.
And then it would
have a same kind
of progressive
aspect to it as well.
>>CLOW: Yeah, that's right.
>>REGINA: --as you
go through life, as
to where your best position for
this or best position for that.
I just bring it
up because that's
something I think that's
complementary to a lot of this.
When people are like I can't
stand this place anymore
and it comes up in
their crises, maybe it's
also time to pull
up stakes and move.
>>CLOW: Yes.
>>REGINA: That
could be part of it.
>>CLOW: Definitely.
>>REGINA: And so
it's worth exploring
if you can find a good-- hard
to find a good astrocartography
psych these days.
>>CLOW: Actually, the online
service that sends out-- I
can't tell you who
it is-- but just
sends out the
astrocartographical map,
and the analysis is very good.
>>REGINA: OK, good.
I just bring it up because it's
just another element in that.
So let's start out with
Saturn, and then we'll
go to Uranus, and then Chiron.
I just find what you wrote
about Chiron fascinating.
But let's talk about
the three stages
of what Saturn does for us at
the first return, the second.
And then after the
second, what happens?
I mean surely it's
returning again,
but we don't hear
much about that phase.
>>CLOW: Well, the first
Saturn return is at age 29,
and people start
feeling this building
pressure when they're 27, 28.
They have the sense
of destiny and there's
something they need to do.
And they also are very
bothered usually by things
that they have to let go of.
And they're being pushed into
a major decision point in order
to change something.
Their work, or have a child, or
get a divorce, or get married,
or whatever-- Many
different things can
happen at this point.
And so that's what happens
with the first Saturn return.
And then we go
through the transits
of midlife crisis and
Chiron return after that.
Then we get another Saturn
return at age 58, 59.
And that's a great transit,
because you've already
lived another 29 or 30 years.
You've already gone through
all this transformation and all
these decisions in your life.
And so second Saturn
return is the time
to decide what you
really want to do
for the rest of your life.
Because your third
Saturn return is
going to come when you're
around 87 or 88 years old.
But that second Saturn return
is a really, really big one,
because that's where you can
really consciously choose
what you'd like to do.
>>REGINA: Now, I have heard
that in some cultures, that's
the age where people,
men and women both,
have finished
their childbearing,
and historically, though
we're living longer now,
so that's changing,
have finished
their major productive
years in terms of career,
classically in the past.
>>CLOW: Sure.
>>REGINA: And then at 61
might even change their name
and then start devoting their
life to the study of themselves
and the spiritual world.
>>CLOW: Yeah, sure.
>>REGINA: So that would
coincide perfectly.
>>CLOW: And that's that
one person, though.
Somebody else might have been
spiritual their whole life,
and when they're 58 they
decide they want to work.
But what they're going to do --
what you want to do is decide
what do I want to do from
age 60 to age 90, basically.
And be careful about that,
because Saturn return
is so powerful,
that if you really
decide you want to
do something, you're
going to be able to do it.
And so you don't want to
miss that opportunity.
>>REGINA: Right.
And you don't want to make an
unwise decision at that point
either.
>>CLOW: Yes, that right.
You want to--
>>REGINA: Can that cast you
into a bit of a downward spiral
if you're just reacting and not
choosing wisely at that time
and squandering that
particular return?
>>CLOW: It could.
But generally speaking, that's
a happy transit for people.
That's a meaningful transit.
>>REGINA: Well, how come
everyone's so afraid of it?
Oh--
>>CLOW: Isn't it funny?
>>REGINA: --I'm in
my Saturn return.
I hear people freaking out
at both ages, 29 and 58.
>>CLOW: I think Saturn
is a wonderful planet.
I think If it
weren't for Saturn,
we wouldn't get off of
our butts and do anything.
>>REGINA: Let's talk about
that for just a moment
because a lot of people
are afraid of Saturn.
Oh, it's going to
make me do something.
Well, that's only
if you haven't been
doing what you're
supposed to be doing
or what your-- from a
soul point of view, what
has been inspiring you to be
done is not being done, right?
>>CLOW: Um-hmm, yeah.
And if people are having
a struggle with that,
it's a good idea to look
at the nodes of the moon,
like the North node of
the moon in your chart
will tell you what your
purpose is in this lifetime,
and the South node will tell
you what you've already done
and what you've come from.
And if you're not getting on
to that North node, purpose
in this lifetime, by the
time you're 29 or 30,
you might want to
decide to do it,
because you're going to float
in your 30s and 40s and 50s.
>>REGINA: Yes.
The nodes aren't talked
about often enough.
>>CLOW: Yeah, I know.
I start a chart with the nodes.
>>REGINA: Did you?
>>CLOW: I always do, because
why is the person there?
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>CLOW: You want a soul read.
>>REGINA: Where
did you come from,
and what are you
moving toward, right?
>>CLOW: That's right.
And the nodes will
give you that reading.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
>>CLOW: But the great
thing about Saturn return,
Regina, is about
95% of people do it.
Saturn is the
planet of necessity.
And even if they think
they don't like it
and they're resisting
it, they'll do it.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Yes.
>>CLOW: Everybody does.
>>REGINA: Even if it
looks a little awkward,
ugly in the moment,
it will probably
smooth out and get you
on the right road anyway.
It could look like a
car wreck initially.
>>CLOW: So there you are
in your early to mid 30s,
and you've changed something,
and you're adjusting,
and you're starting to
develop yourself emotionally.
And then as you start to
approach midlife crisis,
the next major one is
Uranus opposite Uranus.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>CLOW: Then what happens is
just like Saturn return is
a physical change, then
Uranus opposite Uranus,
is an emotional change.
And it's tough.
It's really, really--
>>REGINA: I wrote down 38 to
42, right in there is the--
>>CLOW: Actually,
about 38 to 46.
>>REGINA: 38 to 46.
>>CLOW: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And you also
wrote in your book
that when you went through this
particular phase, you said,
I shook for 18 months.
>>CLOW: I did.
>>REGINA: OK, why?
What was going on with you that
either intimidated, frightened
you, or got you off your duff?
>>CLOW: This is
a great question,
because the reason I was
shaking for 18 months
while I was in graduate
school was Kundalini rising.
So I was in graduate
school while I
was having Kundalini rising,
and I was half crazy.
So I think if I'd had this
book that I wrote myself,
that I wrote after
that, I think I would
have handled myself
a lot better.
Because there's
all kinds of things
you could do when
Kundalini is too intense.
But I didn't have any
idea what was going on.
I thought I was going crazy.
>>REGINA: So where
did it lodge in you?
You say it lodges in
whatever chakra area that--
>>CLOW: Well, what was
happening with me I think,
is that the opening
of my chakra system
was just so intense that
it was making my whole body
shake all the time.
I was just having
creas and Kundalini.
Everybody thought I was crazy.
Everybody's who's seen me since,
my graduate student buddies,
they can't believe
I'm the same person.
>>REGINA: Really?
>>CLOW: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
>>CLOW: And that's
why I wrote the book
because I want
other people to have
some idea of what's
going on here.
>>REGINA: So let's talk
about how that kind of change
shows up emotionally, ages 38
to 46 then in people's lives.
>>CLOW: Yeah.
What happens for people is
people start experiencing heat
in their bodies,
they can experience
some quaking and
shaking, the way I did.
A lot of anxiety.
It can manifest as like some
kind of free-floating fear
about reality.
And you just get to
be very, very anxious.
And then, when that first
transit, the first Uranus
opposite Uranus actually
occurs, whatever age
that is, then what happens
is Kundalini starts
rising in the lower chakras.
And then as it's moving through
the chakras, what it's doing
is it's clearing out
blockages and clearing out
issues that need to move
out of your consciousness
so that you can go
to another level.
So if you're really blocked
in the solar plexus,
at that point in
your life you're
going to be having fights
with every-- probably getting
a divorce, having a
major smash and crash.
>>REGINA: Because that's will
and ego and so forth, right?
>>CLOW: Yeah.
Or you're maybe in business
and you may be having lawsuits.
A lot of lawsuits at
Uranus opposite Uranus.
And then what happens
is the energy moves
through the solar plexus as
a result of all this conflict
and all this resolution
that you're working on.
And then the energy
moves into the heart.
And the goal of
midlife crisis is
to move the energy
into the heart
and through the lower
chakras, because once we
move the energy
into the heart, then
we're able to go to the next
level of emotional growth,
which is a higher level.
>>REGINA: You speak a lot
about sexuality in relationship
to the Kundalini and the
astrological aspects.
Now, what about people
who are just blocked?
They don't experience Kundalini
in any kind of sexual way,
versus also people
who experience it
only in a sexual way
in that age group.
Can you talk about the variances
of sexual behaviors and desires
that happen, and blocks.
>>CLOW: First of
all, ideally, you
have an active sexual
life at this point,
because sexuality is a
wonderful way and an active way
to move these energies.
And so if people do
not have a sexual life,
then I advise a lot of
meditation, and a lot of yoga,
and a lot of
alternative techniques
for moving Kundalini.
Because see, the Kundalini's
going to move no matter what.
And the only issue
is how you're going
to process that Kundalini.
And then in relationships,
the reason that midlife crisis
is such a big deal,
and in this case
we're talking heterosexual
relationships.
I'm not leaving out
two men and two women,
it's just that I'm dealing
with a male/female issue.
In that what happens for the
male during midlife crisis
is usually there
are some problems
with sexual dysfunction when
Kundalini starts rising.
And the reason for
that is that the male
has learned how to hold the
energy in the root chakra
in order to have an
easy and long erection.
But when the energy starts
moving out of the sacral chakra
and into the solar plexus
and then up into the heart,
quite a few men
will have problems
with sexual dysfunction.
And this-- yeah,
it's interesting.
I have quite a few men
coming to me with this issue,
and boy, I got a lot-- I
can create a lot of relief
for people.
>>REGINA: Yes, because there's
nothing physiologically wrong.
>>CLOW: No.
For instance, one of the
reasons that men have affairs
at this point is
they're not having
a very good sexual
relationship with their wife
because their
energy is changing,
and they're not used to
relating from the heart yet.
Because see, once this energy
has moved into the heart chakra
and into the higher
chakras, then this all
straightens itself out and
the phallic function improves.
So men go out and think,
well, it's my wife.
I'll just go find a chick.
And that may work for a
few weeks or something,
but then the same thing
will happen with the chick
or whoever they pick up.
>>REGINA: But that's also
because there's that new hope
in the air--
>>CLOW: Oh, yeah.
That's true.
>>REGINA: --and no judgment.
And so that can all kind of
transpire as it needs to.
>>CLOW: Yeah.
You can have that
hot infatuation
and that will override
even Kundalini rising.
But then even that goes down.
But then at the same
time, what about women?
>>REGINA: That's what
I was going to ask.
>>CLOW: Well,
women at this point
want to move the
energy into the heart.
And they want to--
>>REGINA: Well, a lot of
times they're moms now.
They're engaged in
childbearing, too.
>>CLOW: Right.
Yeah.
Well, basically what
happens for women
is because women are
mothers, and because they're
going through the complexity
that women often have,
all they want to do is
get off by themselves.
So what a hot combination.
And so I did a lot of
counseling back in those days,
advising the husband, like,
OK, just give her some space.
I even had one client who
all his wife wanted to do
is go to Sweden for a year,
and they had three children.
And he was actually
able to let her go,
and she went, and she came back,
and they're still together.
But she had to get out of there.
She was just ready to
explode the whole family.
>>REGINA: OK, now
let's talk about that.
You do in the book,
about there is
a type of female
communication that
happens that is very repressed,
as it has been in more
of the patriarchal paradigm that
we're just now moving out of.
>>CLOW: Right.
>>REGINA: It has been repressed.
And so what happens at this
stage when the Kundalini is
rising and you have not been
able to share your truth?
>>CLOW: Oh, it's a
very, very big issue.
So part of that
desire to go off alone
is to find out
what your truth is,
because you've been
distracted for maybe 20
years of your life,
and you have no idea.
All you know is you're lost.
And so you can see
what a big crisis
that could be with a couple.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Now, and that's where if you're
roughly the same age group.
>>CLOW: Um-hmm.
>>REGINA: And now, the beauty
of not being in the same age
group, saying that a 10
year disparity is one of you
has already passed through.
You're safely to the other side.
Well, before the next
one hits you, anyway.
And then the other one has kind
of a little more support going
through it, right?
>>CLOW: Yeah.
That can happen.
>>REGINA: And you see that.
>>CLOW: Yeah.
I think I do tend to think it's
a little bit easier when people
aren't exactly the
same age because--
>>REGINA: They are not
exactly the same age.
>>CLOW: Yeah.
I think it's a little
bit easier if there's
an age difference,
yeah, because of this.
You can see that.
If it hits at exactly the same
time it's kind of obvious.
>>REGINA: Yes.
OK, so now you also
advise people in the book
that if you're in this
particular phase, Uranus phase,
not to consider getting
married at this time either.
So let's talk about that.
>>CLOW: Sure.
>>REGINA: Because that's
when a lot of people
are wanting to get married,
women have a career.
Now the baby clock's going off,
and they're 38, 40 years old,
got to get on with this thing.
And you're saying don't do it.
>>CLOW: Yeah.
Yeah, definitely.
If you're right on the verge of
having Uranus opposite Uranus,
age 38 to 42, 44,
wherever you are,
it would be better
to just continue
the relationship for a little
while before you get married.
And it's very hard to have
a child at that age, too.
>>REGINA: When you're
going through that.
>>CLOW: Yeah.
And so think of how many women
are having, at this point,
are having their first
child when they're
going through Uranus opposition.
It can be very, very difficult.
And that's why that
older pattern-- I know,
I hate to say it-- but that
older pattern of getting
married in your 20s and Saturn
return, and having children
before these
transits hit, there's
actually a lot of
good reasons for that.
>>REGINA: OK.
Now let's talk about, OK, that's
some of the practical nuts
and bolts of that one
trend-- the Uranus part.
What about the transcendent
and defined part,
and encouraging that part of the
Kundalini rising at this age.
I don't see too much of that.
I mean I've interviewed people
that had this happen to them.
Sometimes even associated
with a near death experience--
>>CLOW: Oh, sure.
>>REGINA: --if you
go that far, right.
>>CLOW: Oh, yeah.
>>REGINA: And you say
you can use meditation,
you can use yoga
and other things.
But how do we use that to have
that wonderful transcendent
experience?
>>CLOW: Yeah.
So what you're really asking,
which is a great question,
is how can we create that?
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>CLOW: So what goes
on transit-wise is OK,
at midlife crisis you go through
an emotional transformation
in order to prepare yourself
for a spiritual development.
So after you go
through midlife crisis,
you've gone through
that emotional change
and you're into your 40s.
You're approaching
Chiron return.
And I'm going to do
these two together
a little bit because what
happens at Chiron return
is actually very strongly
dependent upon what
happens at midlife crisis.
So let's take a person who
goes through an emotional
transformation and
it really works,
and it enables them to start to
develop themselves spiritually.
Then what will
happen is the energy
will move out of the heart
and into this throat,
and the person will start being
able to speak their truth.
And then the energy will move
into the third eye chakra,
where the person
will begin to start
having psychic and
seership abilities.
And then the energy will
move up into the crown chakra
where a person will
experience enlightenment.
So the first pattern
would be if a person does
go through a radical emotional
transformation at Uranus
opposite Uranus,
their chakra system
is automatically
going to start helping
them open into spiritual
dimensions of consciousness.
And as you know, you never
want to do this too fast.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>CLOW: So the wonderful thing
about this natural movement
of the chakra opening is that
it's a natural process that
works very well if you change
a lot at midlife crisis.
But a lot of people don't
change at midlife crisis.
I mentioned to you that
I think 95% of people
transform at Saturn return.
But my estimate
at midlife crisis
is somewhere around maybe--
at this point it's rising.
Like back 20 years ago when
I first wrote the book,
maybe 15% to 20% of people
were changing pretty radically
at midlife crisis.
And see, changing
pretty radically,
that means the positive
conscious change.
It doesn't mean this
mash and crash divorce,
and marrying another person.
It means a real conscious shift.
So if the person-- At this point
I'm estimating that probably
around 30%, maybe
even 40% of people
are actually going through
an emotional transformation
at midlife crisis.
I'm watching people and
I'm seeing this happening.
>>REGINA: That's helpful.
>>CLOW: Yeah, I know.
And because I think that
what we're talking about here
is a level of development
that has been natural to us
for thousands of years
and was shut down
about 5,000 years ago.
In other words, I don't
think it's normal.
>>REGINA: Would you say that's
time for the patriarchal.
>>CLOW: Yeah.
It's a patriarchal shut down.
And I don't think it's normal
to be shut down like this.
And if we look at indigenous
cultures or ancient cultures,
they have different
initiatic processes
at all of these stages in
order to assist a person
to go to another level.
So speaking of Chiron
return, Chiron return
has to do with the illumination
of the crown chakra.
And earlier, you mentioned
to me privately this issue
of Chiron square,
Chiron opposition,
and Chiron upper square.
>>REGINA: I want to
get into that a bit.
>>CLOW: Chiron has
two transit patterns.
One is the square to our
Chiron in our birth chart,
and then opposition,
and then upper square.
And in each one of those square
and opposition positions,
what happens is we have a
kind of mystical illumination
experience.
Everybody does,
but it's so subtle,
and it's coming from
those subtle bodies
that Richard Gerber
is speaking about.
That what happens at that
point is that a lot of people
just don't remember
what happened at all.
But when you come to Chiron
return at age 50 to 51,
you've reached that point
where you realize spirituality
is important.
I mean even if you're the
most ordinary person living
in the middle of
Kansas or whatever,
you know that
spirituality is important.
And so at Chiron
return, if the person
has gone through an emotional
transformation at Uranus
opposite Uranus, then
that higher chakra system
in the crown chakra
opens and people
have really mystical, magical,
illuminated experiences.
Which by the way, may
come through only simply
as realizing one day, I'm happy.
It might be just
as simple as that.
It could be just
that moment when
you're sitting with your dog.
>>REGINA: Or knowing that
gardening is making you happy.
>>CLOW: Yeah.
Your gardening or whatever.
In other words, it's not about--
you don't have to be a guru,
if you know what I mean.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>CLOW: But if you
haven't transformed
at Uranus opposite
Uranus, then what happens
is at this point the Kundalini
is pushing those higher
chakras that it's still
stuck at the emotional level.
Because that breakthrough at
that emotional solar plexus
heart chakra level
has not occurred.
And so, a lot of people
have a midlife crisis
when they're 50 or 51.
If you watch people closely,
and it's really hard,
because it's like people just
don't-- People really think
they're going crazy
at this point.
So if you're having a lot
of difficulty at age 50, 51,
then if you can go back to
your 40s and see what you did,
even if you don't know the
year of your midlife crisis,
you'll go oh, yeah.
I remember.
That was the year I
crashed my car into a tree.
Whatever you did.
And if you can
look at that point
and see what it is that you
didn't do, in other words,
something was happening--
>>REGINA: Back when you
were in that 38 to 46 zone.
>>CLOW: Maybe you were too busy.
Maybe your career was
driving you too much.
Maybe you had too
many kids and you
couldn't take any time
or whatever for yourself.
If you can look at
what you didn't do,
usually you can work through
it and clear out the residue.
Because at 50, 51, you're
really getting pushed the max
at this point.
And then if you
manage to shut it down
at that point, that's
when people start drugging
themselves, and that's
when people just start
shut-- they'll do anything
to shut themselves
down-- sleeping pills,
allopathic drugs.
You name it.
>>REGINA: Because it's
too disconcerting.
That pain of being stuck
in the emotional point.
>>CLOW: At that point it's
a higher frequency push.
That emotional push, as
hard as it is-- We all know,
emotions seem to be
the most difficult.
The higher frequency pushes
are confusing because people
can't identify what's going on.
And then the
culture, the culture
just simply denies everything
I'm saying as I'm sitting here.
>>REGINA: Well, and it has
pills to take care of it
anyway, right.
>>CLOW: Oh, yeah.
>>REGINA: And the
thing is that's also
when people start becoming
physically ill and start
breaking down physically.
>>CLOW: That's right.
>>REGINA: Internal inflammation
starts occurring in the body.
Degenerative diseases
really pick up in the 50s.
And it seems to me in
observing people, like you say,
where there's that deep internal
emotional conflict, that
seems to be the type of person
that ends up with a little bit
more of these chronic
conditions, physically.
>>CLOW: Yeah.
Oh, yeah.
Definitely.
>>REGINA: And so going back
to the sexual aspect of it,
you say in this Uranus
phase, 38 to 46,
that it's important to have a
good clear, open, easy, sexual
life, ideally.
What happens if you've
gone into resistance?
Women are tired of the gig?
Some of them-- Because I know
a lot of women in their 30s
are like, I've had it.
I'm not going to
do that anymore.
I'm going to do what I want.
But right when a time
when people are actually
physically quite capable
and juiced up, so
to speak, what's
happening there when
it goes into dysfunction, and
then competition with the male?
>>CLOW: You know, I don't
feel that I understand that
very well.
And I'm noticing some
pretty major sexual changes
that seem to be going on with
the generations below me.
And I actually think, I don't
know whether things going on
with chemicals or what's
going on in our reality,
but I think people are
approaching sexuality
in a very, very different way.
And so I'm going to be watching
to see how this information--
you know how it is with books.
This could be
information that works
for about three generations.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>CLOW: Because there's
a paradigm in it
that that's really needed
for them at that point.
And it's possible
that the generations
younger than we
are may be working
on something entirely different.
For example, studies
are coming out
now showing that couples
where the man is helping
as much as the woman and
those kinds of things
are showing that there's
less sex going on.
>>REGINA: Yes, I've read that.
>>CLOW: Have you read that?
Yeah.
And so that's OK.
If they're focusing
on something else
and finding another way to work
with energy-- What we're really
talking about here is
working with energy.
And for the generation
of people who
came after the
Victorian generation,
the sexual breakthrough
was of critical importance.
But we may have already broken
through the sexual inhibition,
so now it's OK for anybody
to do anything they want.
And then you may have people
going well, I want to do it,
and somebody else is going to
say no, I don't want to do it.
And that's perfectly OK.
That could be nature
just compensating.
>>REGINA: And men taking
on more feminine traits
in their behavior,
and women taking
on more masculine traits
in their behavior.
>>CLOW: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Because that seems
to be one of the trends.
>>CLOW: It could be
that a lot of the energy
is going into what I call
androgynous and individuation.
>>REGINA: That's
what I'm getting to.
>>CLOW: Yeah, I know.
And it could be
that that discovery
in a woman of the
internal male, or the male
of the internal female could
be the most important usage
of the energy.
And then another
usage of the energy
that I think is really
fascinating to me
right now, because now
I have a granddaughter,
is that men are being
changed profoundly
by caring for their children.
And at this point, a
very big majority of men
are now mothering,
as well as fathering.
And so I think the energy is
going more in that direction.
Because for women,
we've had, those
of us who have had
children, or those
who have cared for
children-- after all, women
seem to either have
them or care for them.
And we have opened our heart
chakra for thousands of years
by caring for
children, and now men
are being given
this opportunity.
>>REGINA: So the trade-off
is that there may not
be that classic old style
sexual charge because
of the polarities.
The trade-off is that you're
getting a more cohesive
male/female balance in
the child-rearing process
and sending maybe even
healthier signals--
>>CLOW: It could be, yeah.
>>REGINA: --to your
children, because we
are moving into a more
matriarchal paradigm.
So it would make sense.
But it's left so
many men so confused.
If they weren't already
confused between 38 and 46
and having some
issues, so to speak,
now you have this
overlay to it, and men
seem to be struggling
even more than women
right now with this whole
self identity and sexuality.
>>CLOW: Yes, I agree with you.
And then throw in sexual
enhancement drugs.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>CLOW: Because the
process that I'm
describing regarding the male
would be this natural energy
rising and the activation.
What happens ultimately,
if this works
as nature seems to
have intended it,
is a man will have
all chakras activated,
all the way up through
the crown chakra.
And then there simply is
no lack of phallic function
because the whole chakra
system is working.
And so many men, younger
men in particular,
as soon as they see
a kind of problem
are taking sexual
enhancement drugs.
And if you think
about it, they're
shutting down a natural
process of nature.
>>REGINA: This is true.
And just like the
gaining of wisdom.
I mean, I interview,
as you know,
hundreds and hundreds of people.
And oftentimes,
the people will be
inspired because they had this
blast open Kundalini experience
where everything was revealed
and the light flooded in,
and suddenly they
knew this and that
and started writing
books about it.
And there are times
I've thought, gosh,
I've never had that
happen like that.
But then I
acknowledged that it's
been a steady growth of
opening, and wisdom that's
been gained, over the decades to
where I feel quite functional.
I feel like
everything's flowing.
If I need or want inspiration,
information, and so forth,
it's right there.
But when did it happen?
I don't know.
It's a process over
decades of happening.
>>CLOW: That's right.
That's right.
And I think it's a
little easier that way.
People who have a quick
breakthrough or a near death
experience or
whatever they have,
it can be very, very
difficult, as you
know, from the spiritual
emergency point of view.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Let's talk for a little bit
about the notion of Chiron
squares.
We alluded to it a bit ago.
And I was fascinated when I
saw that chapter in your book.
I thought oh, my god.
This really nails
at such an early age
what happens to people.
And you were saying that
that square can show up
as early as five
years old, or it
can show up in teens,
or in their 20s.
What happens, just give
us a thumbnail sketch
of the kind of
dynamic that's set up
when you have a very
early Chiron square,
say, five years old.
>>CLOW: OK.
Yeah.
When you have an
early Chiron square,
you have an experience of
full bore illumination.
And it's so intense
and so subtle
that people don't remember.
I had it when I was
5 and 1/2 years old.
And I fell off of a
brick wall because I
was hit by this wave of energy.
And I had a full blown
Kundalini rising at that point
from this experience, which was
really intense and not so hot.
So people don't
necessarily remember it.
Also, another thing, Regina, is
that often death is a teacher.
And there's a very
strong tendency, also,
for people to experience
the death of a relative
or a close person in their
lives at one of the squares
or oppositions or
the upper square.
>>REGINA: And sometimes you were
saying that at a certain age
it leaves the person
living really blasted open
into a spiritual reality
that they don't understand
and can't navigate, with
very little connection
to the physical world.
Now, is that at,
say, at that age,
or is that more at
a pubescent age?
What happens if it
happens at pubescence?
>>CLOW: The younger the
person is, the more likely
they're going to be
to be blown fully open
and then have difficulty
navigating reality.
The youngest you can have first
Chiron square is age 5 and 1/2,
and the oldest is age 23.
>>REGINA: What happens if
you're in a pubescent stage?
>>CLOW: If you're in
a pubescent stage,
you know how puberty
is to begin with.
Puberty always represents a
lot of Kundalini rising energy.
It's not like the full
bore at midlife crisis,
but it's very strong when the
hormonal sequencing starts
to occur.
And so if it combines with
a spiritual breakthrough
like that, it can be wonderful.
But it can also
be pretty intense.
So all of the things--
>>REGINA: Body issues--
>>CLOW: --we're talking about--
>>REGINA: --self hatred
issues of the body
can happen at that time,
even more so, right?
>>CLOW: Oh, sure.
Yeah.
So the wonderful
thing about knowing
about the timing, and the
book has charts at the end,
so you can figure out when
you had that first square.
Did you check that out?
Did it--
>>REGINA: I did.
I checked other things.
But I just read that
part, I happened
to read that part this morning.
>>CLOW: You can go to
the end of the book
and it'll tell when you had
your first square, because it
varies so radically.
So one of the things I did
in the book is traditionally,
people usually had their
children in their 20s.
And so what would happen
with these patterns
would be that parents
would have a kid who
had a Chiron square,
first square, that
was radically
different from theirs.
But the grandparents
of that child
would have the same pattern.
And so, what goes
on is this explains
why the grandparents often
have such a great influence
on the child.
>>REGINA: That's what I
was going to get to next.
>>CLOW: But the parents
have a conflict.
Yeah.
And so that radical
differential creates
a lot of generational stress.
But then if you think about it,
because it changes so much in a
give-- this is another
reason for these peer group
issues, where people
are having their Saturn
return at the same age,
they're having midlife crisis.
People, in a given
year, are having
all of these key passages
happening at the same time.
And this is why we have
to strong relationship
with people our own age.
>>REGINA: Right.
Because you can
relate to this impulse
passing through all
of you collectively.
>>CLOW: You can say, hey,
did that happen to you, too?
And the person will say, yeah.
>>REGINA: OK.
Now, we have, oh, about
five minutes left or so.
Can you just talk a little bit
about what you just brought up,
the need to have
multi-generational influences
and grandparents in
the scene for children.
>>CLOW: Well, this pattern
I was talking about
has changed so radically now,
because so many women now
are having their children
in their late 30s,
and into the early 40s.
And what's happening,
first of all,
is they're having their children
right at midlife crisis,
just when they're stressed out.
And then, to tell you the
truth, their mothers and fathers
are in their late
60s and late 70s--
>>REGINA: They're
devitalizing a bit sometimes.
>>CLOW: And aren't
as likely--- Yeah,
they aren't as likely to
want to be grandparents.
And so I think we're going
through a whole revolution
here in what's going
to be happening.
And then the positive side
of that would be people
are having so many
less children,
that when a child
does finally come,
usually there's so
many relatives that
relate to that child, that at
least that child isn't going
to be abandoned by the
family, for the most part.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Because it needs that
correlative energy
on the other side
of Saturn-- I mean
of Chiron, right?
>>CLOW: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And that wisdom, too.
And that's lost a lot
anyway in our culture when
people aren't multigenerational.
>>CLOW: And once people have
gone through Chiron return,
they're moving
into their mid 50s.
They're becoming wisdom figures.
And so that's why that decision
at second Saturn return at age
58 is so critical.
Because there you
are, and you've
broken through a lot
of things, and you
are becoming a wisdom figure.
So the question is OK, how can
I take all of this knowledge
that I have now and
how can I give it back.
And I think with the
boomer generation,
in particular, that's
a very important issue.
Because the boomer generation
wants to give back.
The issue for us
in our lifetimes
has been emotional
development and giving back.
>>REGINA: What about the time,
and now we've gone through,
say you've made it to your
third Saturn return, which
we agreed was around 87 or so.
But that period of life, do
you believe that our expiration
date is set in our
astrology, so to speak, just
like the rest of our template?
When we're born, does
our soul choose this--
>>CLOW: Yes.
>>REGINA: --beginning to end?
>>CLOW: And astrologers can read
the death date for a person,
by the way.
And we're proscribed
from doing that.
>>REGINA: Yeah, well
it's good not to do it.
>>CLOW: Yeah.
And one of the ideal
points, and then there's
another whole issue here with
people keeping people alive
with allopathic medicine,
because actually,
one of the most
ideal times to die
is around 82 to 84
or 85 years old.
And the reason for that is
that that's Uranus return.
So Uranus has gone
halfway around
and you've had midlife crisis.
And then it takes Uranus 84
years to go around the sun.
So Uranus is the planet
of transformation.
And it's the planet of
triggering illumination
in our consciousness.
So when it returns to
its birth location,
just like with
Saturn return, that's
the point where we can just
move into full bore illumination
and mysticism.
And I can tell you one
thing, if I make it to 84,
and I'm 71 now, if
I make it to 84,
nobody's doing anything
to me after that.
I think that for
people to interfere
with natural processes
past that point
is very, very destructive.
>>REGINA: On so many levels.
>>CLOW: Yeah.
On all levels.
>>REGINA: So many--
and thank you
so much for sharing
that piece of it.
That does seem to me
to be really critical,
as I watch people
go into these years.
You can feel when there's a
desire to start letting go.
The re-examination of the past,
maybe love being expressed,
and a time to move on.
And this just
happened with my aunt
who died about a
week and a half ago.
Last of that generation on my
mother's side, and her body
was just kept going, rushing to
the ER over two, three years,
again and again, when
she had made her peace.
>>CLOW: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And it was so painful
for her and everyone else.
>>CLOW: Yeah.
And people go to the
doctor three days
a week at that age, when they
should be at home looking out
the window at the trees.
And then think of
third Saturn return.
When you get to
third Saturn return,
you don't want to create
a whole new reality.
>>REGINA: No.
At 87?
Not most people,
that's for sure.
>>CLOW: And I have
been lucky enough
to have some elders in the
family who lived to almost 100,
and it's been a
wonderful experience.
But none of them
interfered with nature.
They just let the
natural processes go.
So I hope with this kind
of transit information,
I hope finally we're going
to come to that point
where it's going to
be OK for a doctor
to say I don't want
to intervene here.
I don't want to
do anything here.
You're 86 years old.
It's not a good idea.
And I hope we're
going to come to that.
>>REGINA: I hope so, too.
And on that, thank you so much.
This is very illuminating.
Very illuminating.
"Astrology and the Rising of
Kundalini," a truly practical
guide to understanding these
grand passages of life.
You can find the book
through any major bookseller
or their websites.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on GaiamTV.
[THEME MUSIC]